-------------------------
Expert Reactions

Increasing Compliance, Simplifying GST, and Improving International Tax Cooperation
Mukesh Butani, Senior Associate, Chair in U.S.-India Policy Studies

As the new government’s first full budget, the Budget 2024-2025 will need to reorient efforts on good governance and managing fiscal deficits. The budget should focus on increasing compliance, modifying the goods and services tax (GST) regime, and improving international tax cooperation.

The budget should further simplify the extant tax structure in India, possibly with an announcement of a new Direct Taxes Code. Such enhancements should ideally promote savings or investments, aligning with broader economic goals like fostering innovation. The budget should proactively stride toward addressing the serpentine tax litigation cycles. Negotiated settlements for large taxpayers could be a move in the right direction. The budget must also make necessary changes to the transfer pricing regime to ease foreign transactions. The inter-percentile range rule should be aligned with international interquartile range rules for cases where a price adjustment is not possible, in turn aligning Indian transfer pricing regulation with international practice.

The budget could herald a future-fit tax function that could entail tax compliance and transparency. While the “Startup India” initiative has provided valuable support, a significantly larger dedicated fund is needed to truly propel India’s AI and other frontier technology sectors. Tax breaks, extended concessions, and a dedicated tax policy endeavour would align with India’s development goals.

Outcomes from the 53rd Goods and Services Tax Council Meeting, including proposals for rate rationalization and the issuance of clarifications on certain goods and services, are expected to make headwinds. A sunset clause for anti-profiteering measures under the GST seems to be a shoo-in. While this will be on the agenda of the GST Council, the budget could signal movement in this direction.

Internationally, India’s trifecta of source ascendancy, design simplification, and uniform methodology will be designed depending on how it prepares for the adoption of the “Global Anti-Base Erosion Model Rules” (Pillar Two of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Project). Robustness in tracing and maintaining multinational enterprise–specific data will go hand in glove with the tax administration efforts. Whether India adheres to international tax cooperation under the aegis of the United Nations remains to be seen. The budget will be released a week before the July session of the UN meetings, and India’s policy stance will be monitored by experts around the globe.




Image
Jayant Krishna
Strengthening Implementation of the National Education Policy 2020
Jayant Krishna, Senior Fellow, Chair in U.S.-India Policy Studies

Only three Indian universities feature among the top 200 universities of the QS World University Rankings 2023. India requires not only better academic standards in higher education but also enhanced research spending and greater ease of conducting research. The Budget 2024-2025 provides an opportunity to reorient India’s attention to improved implementation of the National Education Policy 2020 (NEP 2020) to support education, skilling, and research and development.

NEP 2020 focuses on restructuring school education to allow for vocational training, emphasizes early childhood education, and promotes multilingualism. NEP 2020 also presents higher education reforms, such as the introduction of a four-year multidisciplinary undergraduate program, flexible entry and exit from college programs, and a single regulator for the sector. The policy also focuses on greater integration of education with technology, particularly considering the availability of online and AI-powered educational resources.

NEP 2020 recommendations are radical and require financial resources, staff recruitment, infrastructure augmentation, and technology support. However, public spending on education and skill development in India is barely 3 percent of its GDP. At this spending level, India’s demographic dividend will remain elusive and an unrealized opportunity, also pulling down its Human Development Index score significantly. Considering these challenges, the government should eventually spend at least 6 percent of its GDP on education and skill development.

Strengthening India’s educational system will open pathways for improved advanced research, which is critical for several of India’s high-tech manufacturing ambitions, such as those related to AI and semiconductors. Currently, India barely spends 0.64 percent of its GDP on research and development in science and technology, the lowest among all major economies. This should be gradually enhanced to 2.5 percent. The Anusandhan National Research Foundation also should be operationalized broadly on the lines of the National Science Foundation, an independent U.S. federal agency that supports science and engineering across all states and territories.


Image
Akanksha Golchha
Green MSMEs, Green Jobs, and the Circular Economy
Akanksha Golchha, Fellow, Chair in U.S.-India Policy Studies

The previous financial year witnessed substantial investments in the renewable energy sector, accompanied by a plethora of government schemes ranging from demand-side subsidies for electric vehicles, biogas plants, and rooftop solar systems to supply-side incentives such as production-linked incentives for solar photovoltaic modules, batteries, green hydrogen, and electrolyzers. The Interim Budget 2024-2025 reaffirmed India’s commitment to achieving net-zero emissions by 2070. As the PM Surya Ghar, the government’s ambitious rooftop solar scheme, has encountered challenges and electric vehicle sales are dwindling, reforms are expected to address these issues. Additionally, offshore wind, green hydrogen, sustainable aviation fuel, and biofuels can stimulate investment in the sector. Building on its successes, the government should focus on solarizing micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs), upskilling for green jobs, and product refurbishment.

Following the revamp of the residential rooftop solar sector, now is an opportune time to introduce a special scheme for India’s 63 million MSMEs. The outcomes of this initiative could be far reaching—for example, the initiative could reduce the cost of energy for MSMEs while advancing India’s renewable energy goals.

In addition, a focus on growth-enabling reforms for job creation in the renewable energy sector could help the sector meet the employment targets set by the government under various schemes, such as the target of 0.6 million jobs set under the National Green Hydrogen Mission.

India has been recording its hottest temperatures this year, underscoring an urgent need for infrastructure development to meet heightened cooling demands, which is particularly necessary to build resilience in communities most vulnerable to the impact of heat. On the other hand, India is making significant strides toward the “right to repair,” which supports environmental sustainability. Providing financial incentives for this initiative would help create the necessary ecosystem for the repair and refurbishing market. The budget, while providing additional incentives for emerging technologies, should focus on designing incentives to address the socioeconomic challenges emerging due to climate change. 



--------------------------
Corporate Reactions

Chairman of Ashok Leyland reacts to Budget 2024. Here's what he reacts…
“The continued emphasis on fostering investment and enhancing road infrastructure, especially in Andhra Pradesh and Bihar will facilitate growth in the manufacturing and automobile sectors. Focus on private investment in infrastructure, mining and housing sector is also likely to boost the sale of CVs," said Dheeraj Hinduja, Chairman, Ashok Leyland.

"Furthermore, reduction in duties on rare earth minerals will help in promoting sustainable mobility and this resonates with our commitment to fostering a cleaner and more sustainable future," added Hinduja. 



Chairman & MD of Bharat Forge Ltd reacts to Budget 2024; Know what he said…
“I would also particularly commend the fresh-thinking and approach of the government in ‘Skilling’ and ‘Urban development’ both of which demanded urgent attention. I greatly appreciate the operationalization of Anusandhan NRF and the exclusive venture-fund for Space segment," said Baba Kalyani, Chairman & MD, Bharat Forge Ltd.

Kalyani added, "More importantly, the 1-lakh crore financing pool to bolster private sector driven research and innovation at commercial scale will have a great impact in transitioning India towards a Product’s Nation in the long-term. While the budget allocation for Defence Industry is in expected lines, creation of the Critical Minerals Mission and articulation of India’s strategy on Small Modular Nuclear Reactors will go a long way in bolstering the AatmaNirbhar Bharat agenda."





“The provisions for the rural economy and infrastructure will boost the economy,” says, Hero MotoCorp Executive Chairman
“The provisions for the rural economy and infrastructure, coupled with land reforms and ease of doing business, will further boost the overall economy. Furthermore, this budget reinforces our commitment to supporting youth, farmers, women, and the underprivileged, ensuring inclusive growth and prosperity for all," stated, Pawan Munjal, Executive Chairman, Hero MotoCorp.



Santosh Iyer, MD & CEO, Mercedes-Benz India, reacts to the budget. Here's what he says…
"We are glad the capex on infra projects tops govt’s priority, with 3.4% GDP allocation. We were expecting GST announcement of long-term continuation of reduced GST for BEVs; however, developing a climate finance taxonomy to aid capital for climate adaptation and mitigating climate change, is a step in the right direction for achieving climate commitments," said Santosh Iyer, MD & CEO, Mercedes-Benz India.



Anil Agarwal, Non-Executive Chairman, Vedanta Ltd
“The focus on job creation with three innovative employment-linked schemes is timely. The abolition of angel tax will give a big boost to our startups and young entrepreneurs who are the job creators of the future. The commitment to speed up IBC resolution will lead to 12,000 businesses restarting operations and many more jobs," believes, Anil Agarwal, Non-Executive Chairman, Vedanta Ltd.

He adds, “I am also delighted to see the announcement related to critical minerals mission. India must explore, mine and process these metals of the future domestically."




Puneet Chandok, President, Microsoft India & South Asia, comments on budget! Check it out
Puneet Chandok, President, Microsoft India & South Asia, said on the Budget 2024, “The Union Budget and Economic Survey’s emphasis on technological innovation and digitization sets India on the fast track to becoming an ‘AI-first nation,’ opening new opportunities for collective and inclusive progress from commerce to communities."

Chandok added, “Leveraging a digitized economy and an AI-ready workforce aligns well with the budget’s priorities towards employment & skilling, innovation, research & development, and productivity & resilience in agriculture. With a diffusion rate surpassing that of any previous technology, India leads the world in AI skill penetration and talent concentration rates. This progress is remarkable, with human capital, businesses, and public sector organizations rapidly adopting new technologies."



day Kotak, Founder and Director, Kotak Mahindra Bank, reacts to budget. Here’s what he said…
Uday Kotak, Founder and Director, Kotak Mahindra Bank, reacts to budget. On a post of X, he stated, “Well thought out budget. Fiscal discipline maintained. Right  focus on employment and Msme. Capital gains tax smartly simplified, leaning in favour of revenue. STT increase is necessary sand in the wheels of high derivative volumes. Paradigm shift of saver to investor continues."




 Sajjan Jindal, Chairman, JSW Group says prioritizing employment, skilling, and MSMEs is crucial for a strong economy!
Sajjan Jindal, Chairman, JSW Group, said, “Glad to see the Union budget's commitment to fiscal discipline and infrastructure development. A fiscal deficit of 4.9 per cent, with a target of 4.5 per cent next year, shows our economic prudence. Prioritizing employment, skilling, MSMEs, and the middle class is crucial for building a strong, resilient economy."




Avishek Gupta, MD and CEO, Caspian Debt says a long-standing demand for climate taxonomy has been committed in the budget speech, hoping that it is released soon.
“A long-standing demand for climate taxonomy has been committed in the budget speech. I am hoping that it is released soon, making climate-related financing easier to channel. In addition to that, a number of announcements keeping in mind climate change and the need to improve resilience to climate change is refreshing. Strong and well-executed initiatives to address the issues and opportunities would lead us to a more climate-resilient country," said Avishek Gupta, MD and CEO, Caspian Debt.

Gupta added, "The mention of rental housing in urban locations is much needed. We have had strong belief that the availability of good quality housing especially for lower income segments including migrant workers is much needed to improve the overall quality of life for everybody. "Removal of angel tax will hopefully improve the ability of startups to attract a wide variety of investors including individual investors."